[SOUND]
Okay, so in this lecture,
we're going to talk about heading elements
and some new HTML5 semantic elements.
First of all,
what does the word semantic mean?
Well, definition of semantic is relating
to meaning in language or logic.
In other words,
it has some inherent meaning,
the names have some inherent meaning.
Now when it applies to HTML,
what does semantic html element mean?
Well, a semantic html element
is an element that implies some
meaning to the content.
In other words, it's an element that
tells you something about the content,
whether its importance, whether it's
a little bit of its description,
it basically hints to you to that meaning.
Now the reason that's important
is because us, humans, and
machines can understand the meaning of
that content surrounded by a semantic
tag much better than if we just surround
it with some tag that doesn't really
tell us anything other than this is some
sort of a division within the document.
And also,
it may help search engine rankings.
In other words, SEO and SEO stands for
search engine optimization.
Now I stress may here because
there is some controversy and
disagreement among experts
if this is really true.
Now experts who disagree with this
say that modern search engines are so
sophisticated nowadays that just about
nothing other than the content itself
affects the ranking of the page.
So you're welcome to go and Google for
the words, do semantic HTML5
tags help SEO, and you could see
a lot of discussion on this topic.
Now let's take a look at an example
of the first type of semantic tags
that we're going to look at, the headings.
Okay, so here, I'm in Sublime Text and
I'm in the examples Lecture06 folder
looking at the file called headings.html,
and this is a very simple HTML document.
It has all the h1 elements, h1, h2,
h3 and all the way to the h6 element,
well, basically,
all the available heading elements.
And what these headings are trying to
convey is that the heading content
between opening h1 and
the closing h1 element is the most
important heading in the document,
and on, and on, and on.
So h6 would be also a heading
of the document, but
it's the least important one of them all.
So, let's take a look at what this
document looks like in the browser,
and here it is.
So we can see the browser defaulted
to styling that basically,
visually tells us that
this is the main heading.
Heading number 2 is a little
less important and on and
on all the way to Subheading 6, which
is the least important of the headings.
Couple of important points to
understand about these elements.
First, even though their default rendering
in the browser appears to give them
visual distinction,
these should not be used for styling.
These elements are only meant to convey
structure of your HTML page, nothing more.
With CSS,
any regular development can be styled to
look like any one of these heading tags.
So, why not just use a div?
Because if we did, we would lose
the meaning of what a heading is.
Second, something that's marked h1
is obviously the most important and
generalized description of
the content of this page.
And while there are disagreements among
the SEO experts about how effective
these semantic tags are for helping
your search engine rank in general,
everyone agrees that when it comes to the
heading tags, and specifically the h1 tag,
that it is of utmost importance to use it
and that it should contain the wording,
which truly conveys the central
topic of the rest of the content.
Okay, so let's take a look at another HTML
document called semantic-elements.html.
And that file is located in
the examples Lecture06 folder right
next to the headings.html
file that we just looked at.
And in this document, I introduced
a whole bunch of new HTML5 semantic tags.
And so, let's go over them right now.
So the first thing you see here
is the new header tag, and
the header tag basically contains some
header information about the page.
So usually, it consists of company logo,
some tagline, sometimes, navigation.
Actually, often, navigation is
contained within the header as well.
As you can see,
this is exactly what we have right here.
The nav tag signifies some content that is
used for navigation within our website.
Afterwards, we have our
familiar h1 tag and
you should absolutely always have that.
And then we have a couple of
set of section tags here.
And within each section tag,
we have a bunch of article elements.
If you look at the HTML5 specification,
you'll see that the way the section
element is defined and the way the article
element is defined is that it's usual or
it makes sense that the article
should go inside the section element.
However, that is not always the case and
there's certainly no hard rule about it.
It's very possible that the article
can also have sections within that.
So, you're certainly not
constrained to have this structure.
We scroll down,
we see we have an aside tag.
An aside tag is basically an element
that communicates that there's something
that is inside of this element that is
related to the main content of the page,
but not as direct a relationship
as the main content.
And finally, we have the footer tag,
which, just like it sounds,
has the footer information in it.
Now, the thing to note about all of these
tags is they're all block level elements.
So as far as we're concerned,
visually we might as well have
just used the div tags everywhere.
However, if you look at the code, it is
obvious how much easier it is to read and
understand what's going on
structurally in this HTML page.
For example,
you can easily see that Article 1, 2 and
3 are somehow related and
are somehow different from Articles 4,
5 and 6 since they live in
two different sections.
That's the power of the semantic elements.
They inherently convey some meaning.
Let's take a look at
this page in the browser.
As you can see,
here's our header element and
the nav element is sitting
right inside of it.
And as you can see, the section article,
the footer, they're all block level
elements since every single one of them
is actually on their own new line.
So in summary, well chosen content for
h1 element is crucial
to search engine optimization, and you
should definitely take advantage of that.
And remember,
semantic elements do allow you for
more meaningful expression of the
structure of your HTML code, HTML page,
but they don't really give you any more
functionality than a regular div or
regular span would without it.
Next, we're going to talk about
Structuring Content with Lists.